Okay, we're getting ready.
So today is April 29th, I believe.
Yeah.
And we're here.
Oh, I forgot.
Okay, so tell me your name and age.
My...
formal name or my name my common name is lily alvarez i'm 70 years old okay you're gonna have to talk a little bit louder oh almost i'm 69 and three quarters okay and then uh where were you born i was born in woodlake california and you lived in california your whole life yes okay
And then can you tell me a little bit about your participation in the Chicano movement?
I was raised in Kern County starting probably when I was 10 or 11.
So my
My high school years are in Kern County.
I remember the grape strike breaking out in the mid sixties, early sixties.
I would have been in either middle school or high school.
I remember my family, my parents were like, yuck.
I don't know what that's all about.
My grandparents seemed to be supportive of the farm workers' movement.
I had a couple of uncles that were labor contractors.
Which uncles?
So that would have been my Aunt Virginia's husband, my Aunt
chavela's husband um they were labor contractors they were labor contractors yeah so what does that mean well that means that they that they uh would recruit farm workers they would house them they would take them they would be in contract with ranchers and farmers
So they were not necessarily farm workers themselves or at that time period?
No, they weren't.
They were the contractors.
So kind of like the middleman, the middleman.
Yeah.
Attracting the recruiting, the workers, keeping the workers in line, getting them to work, providing transportation, some housing.
So with that kind of background, I remember there a lot of strife within the family.
where my younger aunts, who were both college students at Fresno State, they'd come home on Sundays and then they'd have this big breakout of fighting over the politics of workers.
So in the midst of all that, I think I was very ambivalent, to say the least, that I really didn't know
I didn't understand what was going on.
But this is more, you're talking more in terms of the labor strike, like the UFW stuff.
Yeah, yeah.
So I eventually, I had always been raised to, that I was supposed to get an education.
So I went, after high school, I went to Bakersfield College.
And then from Bakersfield College, I went to San Jose State.
And San Jose State was the first time that I was become
politically conscious of what was going on.
At that time, a lot of Vietnam protests.
I remember being in San Francisco for one of the marches.
There was a million people in the streets.
I mean, it was huge, these marches.
And I went because one of my fellow students encouraged me to go to
to go to that march.
So I went, I don't even know who I went with or how I got there.
I can't remember.
That was so long ago.
But I remember seeing just millions, I mean, just thousands and thousands of people, thousands.
They said it was a million people at that march.
I was going to San Jose State.
And actually, to be quite honest, I was probably homesick.
My aunt Lupe at that time now was living in San Juan Batista.
So I would go and I would visit.
I would help her to take care of her little baby.
And more and more, I started getting involved watching what the
what the Teatro was doing, Teatro Campesino.
And I remember the first time I saw a play.
I think it was, I don't think it was Bernabé, I think it was Soldado Rosso.
But it was a slice of life play.
It's about a family and the sun going off to the Vietnam War.
And I remember sitting there in the audience and seeing this image of a family that looked like mine, a family whose dynamics were like mine.
And it was the first time that I had seen my people, my life experience
dramatized in something bigger than just life and so it it it woke me up to wanting to be part of something bigger than myself and at that time you know i was doing well in in in college and i was
in my last semester to finish college, and I dropped out with nine units to complete my BA so that I could join the teatro and go with them to Mexico City.
And what year is this happening?
So you talked about you were, you transferred?
73, 74, something in there.
So you transferred from Bakersfield College to San Jose State in 1973?
Probably, no, even earlier than that.
So what time?
71.
71, you think.
So I would have left Kern County in 71.
So you were in 1971, you went to San Jose State, and about this time is the same time you went to that anti-war protest.
Mm-hmm.
72, something like that.
Yeah.
So between 1971 and 1973 is when all this was kind of like bubbling up.
Right, right.
I remember people on campus talking about bilingual and bicultural.
And I was like, what the hell is that?
I'd never heard these terms, you know, what it meant to be.
I knew what bilingual meant.
That meant that you could speak two languages.
Mm-hmm.
And I was like, what the hell is bicultural?
What does that mean?
I never heard that term in my family or on the kitchen table, never heard bicultural.
It took me a long time to realize that bicultural meant being able to act among whites and get along and know how to behave
in my own brown family and the role that I was supposed to play in that family.
That's what bicultural meant?
That's how I began to interpret what bicultural meant.
So kind of like maybe navigating?
Yeah.
Like...
navigating your family life or like what your culture was within your family.
And then kind of like the outside.
I mean, in white, in the white community, you're, you're supposed to be, you're supposed to be verbal.
You're supposed to be, you're supposed to talk.
You're supposed to assert yourself.
And in a, but yet when I'm at my grandmother's house or at my mom's house,
That's not the role that I was supposed to play.
And that to me is what I started to realize meant what was meant by being bicultural.
That I could navigate successfully in both cultures.
But you're saying this is your understanding of it.
Because nobody was telling me what bicultural meant.
So did you ever find out, like, what was... No.
From an academic perspective, no.
I was a history major, so I wasn't really into psychology, sociology, you know, any of those classes.
I'm sure I would have learned had I been... So there was... When you talk about this term bicultural...
You're saying that it was something that was just being like a term that was being thrown around, but nobody was really kind of explaining it.
Correct.
And so you kind of made your own interpretation of it.
And it could have been that I could have asked, but being the little country bumpkin at San Jose State, I wasn't, you know, I didn't want to show how stupid I was.
So I didn't help.
My mouth had asked.
Okay.
So your original question was, when did I start getting involved in the Chicano movement?
Yeah, or how did you see like your participation?
Like what kind of led you?
How do you see yourself as a participant of the Chicano movement, if at all?
You know, so by this time now, I'm in Teatro Campesino.
and participating in either the background stuff of doing bookkeeping behind the scenes, or I was actually put on stage.
And all of a sudden, I found myself in marches.
You know, we were being invited to come and participate in marches, to come and perform at colleges and articulating, if you will, what the issues were.
And I think that's the part that I really started to learn
was that you could educate lots of people through the performing arts.
That you could tell a story and tell a story that people could relate to by virtue of understanding their culture, understanding what their family values were, what their family dreams were, what their
what they believed in.
And because we were creating, if you will, we were creating an illusion.
I mean, that's what theater is, it's an illusion.
And because we were the masters of that illusion, we could create heroes, we could create,
We could create possibilities.
We could create the accomplishments.
We could create a vision.
And so more and more through my association with the teatro, I saw the role that the performing arts could play.
And I thought that was an important role, an important contribution because you weren't seeing Chicanos on TV.
You weren't seeing Chicanos in movies.
You weren't seeing Chicanos on the front page of Life magazine.
And so we had to tell our own story.
We had to.
We had to project.
So when you say that you saw that creativity of the Teatro Campesino as kind of like creating a new vision, you said that you saw that as an important contribution.
And so I'm wondering, can you explain like an important contribution to what?
To me, I always thought about one of the fundamental issues that we were trying to articulate in the 60s were the number of Latinos that were getting drafted into service and going to Vietnam and dying in Vietnam.
And you started to realize that this was brown on brown.
What was wrong with this picture?
And how, and how, whatever, whatever, what's the word I want?
Whatever,
benefits you had being white, they were not benefits that were available to Latino kids, to Chicano kids.
It's not like they could go to college.
It's not like, in my own situation, Ro, I had no idea.
All I knew was how to get to Bakersfield College.
I had no idea how you went from a JC to a,
to a four-year college.
I had no idea.
Lupe and Luis came to visit me.
I'm living in this little tiny shack, and she asked me, what are you going to do after this semester?
And I said, I don't know.
I don't know what I'm supposed to do.
She said, don't you know how to apply for college?
I said, no.
She said, I'll help you, and I'll have Luis write letters of recommendation for you.
I had no idea how you were supposed to apply.
So if I don't even know, and my parents were pretty stable, can you imagine all those other Latino kids, all those farm worker kids who never had a chance, who didn't know how to get a student deferment, how to get out of being drafted, going to.
Somebody once said that the common language after English in Vietnam was Spanish.
There were so many Mexican kids
that were over there.
And so what we were trying to do is to raise consciousness, raise awareness that what was going on in Vietnam in and of itself was wrong.
The war was wrong.
Number one.
Number two, it was being fought on the backs of Latino and black kids.
And three,
Even if those Latino and black kids could come home, they were not availed the kind of benefits that mainstream society had available to them.
And so it was a matter of being able to raise that consciousness and to ask for what was rightfully ours.
What was that?
Which was
which was to be able to express who we were, to be accepted for who we were, to be able to reap the benefits of being, you know, members of this country, of this nation, being able to get housing, to get education, to get jobs, to get...
okay we're back um so what were you just talking about so you're talking about a lot of like the anti-war and kind of like trying to spread a message that this was really kind of like a brown on brown war and the war you're talking about is the vietnam war right right right right
and um actually i have i have kind of like a side question about that because grandpa was in world war ii and so i'm kind of curious just maybe for my own knowledge um like what was that like being raised by somebody who was a veteran who as you already kind of stated was
skeptical or unsure about the Chicano labor movement being headed by the UFW and then these kind of like expectations that you're gonna go to school but not provide you with any like tools to actually do that so I'm wondering like what are your own kind of like feelings about all that as it relates to where you ended up during that time period
You know, you hear stories, Robie, about how Grandpa and I would always knock heads.
We were always on different sides of the aisle.
I mean, so that's what it was like, a constant battle with my dad.
And over the years, I saw him.
I saw him come to a realization
that the Vietnam War was wrong and that we needed to get out of it.
He saw the politics behind it.
For as much as I was out there in the streets protesting, I wasn't really following the battles.
or what was going on, whereas my dad was.
My dad was following, you know, all the military decisions that were being made and got very frustrated and very angry, you know, about the political system and what was happening.
So by the time we pulled out of Vietnam, he was
He was pretty sour on the whole thing.
So he really lost a lot of trust in government.
And then when you were talking about this message of black and brown youth being drafted and sent to go fight in Vietnam,
And that part of like what was wrapped into that is that I think this is what you're saying.
I mean, correct me if I'm wrong, but that there was this kind of like part of the message that that you were picking up on or that the theater was promoting was that.
You know, even as you're going out and, you know, becoming a soldier for the U.S.
Army or for the United States government, that whatever benefits you might have as a soldier coming back were not given to Chicanos or black people.
So is that correct?
Or were you kind of mentioning that or was I making my own stuff up?
um because you were talking about something about like white benefits like whatever benefits white people had like we didn't have those no matter what you know what the benefit was the the white benefit is you come back from world war ii
you get some kind of a steady job, you get money, you get a house, your kids go to school, you go to school with the GI Bill, you teach your kids how to go to school with the GI Bill.
Latinos, like my dad, my dad went to World War II.
He came back, he wasn't, he came back to the fields.
He didn't go back to school.
That was one of his biggest regrets.
Yeah.
Is that he never took advantage of the GI Bill.
And I don't... I think that what... That... I don't know whether or not it was family.
It must have been a sense of...
of loyalty to the family and coming back and earning to take care of the family.
And, and so he never got to go to school.
He never got to, you know, take advantage.
It's not until my mom and dad marry.
that they applied for the GI Bill for a house.
Yeah, that's the first time.
So he doesn't know how to teach his kids how to go to school because he didn't go to school.
And so... Do you think the...
I mean, so do you think maybe like part of it was that he felt obligated or tired to take care of his family when he came back?
Or do you think it's also that nobody or, you know, was anybody there to say, hey, you should take advantage of this GI Bill and go to school?
I don't think so.
I think that was the point.
There was no infrastructure for my dad or his peers, you know.
on how to take advantage of, okay, look, you have these benefits, this, you know, this GI bill, but I'm talking more about white privilege.
There was white privilege.
There's always been white privilege.
And so that's what I'm talking about when I say, you know, Latinos, I'm just articulating how it, you know, how it, how it becomes real.
You know, it's one thing to say white privilege, but then it's another to describe exactly, you know, what happened.
And so my dad, you know, didn't have that benefit.
Are you thinking about it, like, in terms of maybe something having to do with, like, the reproduction of knowledge?
So, like, are you tying that in there?
Your dad didn't know what to do.
He didn't know what to tell you to do.
And then you ended up kind of like, okay, I'm supposed to go to school, but I don't know like what I'm doing.
No, no.
It was clear.
My mom and dad both knew because they had seen that education seemed to be the ticket to get to a different place, a different social status.
Okay.
So that's why they were hammering, go to school, go to school, go to school.
Yeah, but the... The mechanics of how to... That's what I'm saying.
They didn't know the mechanics of how you apply for school, that there's an application process.
Yeah.
They didn't know that.
I think they were probably hoping that I would have learned that someplace... By going to high school or something.
High school, junior college...
that in some way I was going to learn that.
So, well, so that's what I was thinking in terms of like what you were talking about, white privilege, that that is maybe a privilege of whites is to know, like, how do you get through these different institutions?
Well, the way that they learned it, whites, is that they went through it.
They knew people that went through it.
So you don't have the same kind of reproduction happening in your family, in your community.
Right.
Okay.
What was I going to say?
Another thing that I wanted to mention, Ro, is you know how today we talk about identity politics in the sixties?
I don't know about African-Americans.
but I do know about Latinos.
We didn't have an identity.
We knew we had come from Mexico.
We wanted to be American, so we settled with this term called Mexican-American.
It isn't until we start protesting
that we come to identify ourselves as Chicano.
And I think that at the same time, you're seeing Native American, with AIM, you see Black Panthers, you see different African-American
coalitions, students, white students, progressive students.
So you see people starting to formulate an identity.
Up until then, our identity was defined by someone else, by movie makers, by television.
by magazines, by mass media, somebody else was, and didn't have any idea of who we were.
And so I see, so when people talk about identity politics today, I think about, you know what?
We helped to create identity and it was not a bad thing.
I remember that after the Vietnam War, the teatro moved into more cultural kinds of plays, productions.
We were the first ones to bring Azteca dancers into California, into the United States.
we were the first ones to begin celebrating Dia de los Muertos.
We were the first ones to start producing images of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
I mean, those kinds of, and so now what we're doing is saying, hey,
Chicanos, we come, we have a history.
We have, we have roots.
We have, you know, we have, we have an identity that, that we're going to, we're going to promote for ourselves.
And that's where you start seeing that.
And I think, what do you feel?
I think African-Americans were always two or three steps ahead of
Latinos.
I mean, they're just, you know, they have more generations of being educated here in the United States.
You know, they had... When did the Vietnam War end?
Probably, I want to say 74, 75.
So, according to you, most of what the teatro was doing was kind of just
Trying to spread a message, like an anti-war message.
That and the, what do you call it, remember that the grape strikes are going on at the same time.
So a labor and anti-war message, maybe.
And then once that kind of died down or settled or ended or whatever, that's when the teatro and that's when you guys all really kind of jumped on this more cultural message.
And what do you think, why do you think that happened?
then like what do you was it just okay we don't have anything else to talk about or or spread a message about so now we're gonna focus on this thing or do you think it was there the whole time and these other issues were maybe more at the center or at the forefront i think what do you call it how do you think that happened i think that um
for example, images of the Virgen de Guadalupe.
I mean, if you look at the labor movement and you see Caesar and you see the marches, you see banners of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
You see her as, you know, as the patron saint of campesinos.
And so she was always there.
That's part of, you can identify.
You know, when you see that, you go, oh,
That's where I belong.
And why was that?
Well, let's see.
Blonde, blue eye on the 16 magazine.
That's not me.
Virgen de Guadalupe.
I think I've seen her a lot of times in church when I used to go with grandma.
I think I belong over here.
So the church, the church is...
promotion of the virgen is what made you recognize that as as some kind of cultural symbol for you no it's not that what do you call it it's um i know that when we started the production of the virgen they were i mean all part of part of mounting a play
includes, if you will, like a learning process, or it was in the teatro.
And I remember that Estruiz would be creating a play.
He'd be walking through, he'd be almost like whatever he was reading and absorbing, he was also teaching us.
And so this is where we begin to learn
So that experience in and of itself was so, what do you call it, so dynamic.
And so what you had was you had a period of education that was going on where we were starting to learn
We were starting to learn more and more about our own Mexican history.
And I remember, Robbie, think about Matias being six months old or three months old in that passport picture.
That passport picture is because we're going to travel to Chile.
just before Allende was, there was a curita on there, and they assassinated.
Did they assassinate him?
I think so.
We were starting to do more and more, well, we'll call it international, but it really was intercontinental, because it was more and more invitations to go to Mexico City, to go to Mexico and perform.
performances now we were venturing into Latin America I think in the early years of the teatro when they were associated with the farm workers there was a pull toward Europe because I remember the teatro going to Europe performing and now what you saw was more of a pull toward Latin America Mexico Central America
So dad was in it before you were in it?
Yes.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
He was in it when he was at Fresno State, and I didn't come in until when I went to San Jose State.
So they had already relocated to San Juan.
He came from Fresno to San Juan.
So there was now more of a pull.
I think it was becoming more international, becoming more...
The teatro and Luis and his visualizing of where he wanted to see the teatro move toward.
Why were there invitations, international invitations, whether it was Europe or Latin America?
The art form in and of itself, there was Comedia del Arte is what it was called.
And it was an art form.
And I think because I remember going to New York
and these different theater companies wanting to be in our presence.
Look at even Peter, what's his name, Peter?
Peter Fonda?
No, the director from the Royal Shakespearean Theater.
I mean, they wanted to come and spend a month with Teatro Campesino because the art form in and of itself was so
On the one hand, it was unique.
On the other hand, it was steeped in tradition.
And that art form was one of out in the open, not within a proscenium stage, you know, where you've got a stage and then you have a theater.
Okay.
That's proscenium stage.
Now you were doing theater.
Out in the open, open air theater, okay?
And you were doing political theater.
And so that art form was what was attracting, if you will.
Either other people wanted to be like what we were doing or they were doing what we were doing and wanted to interface with.
with other colleagues that were doing this kind of theater.
So one of the things my dad was talking about when I did my interview with him was how he thought of, and a lot of this is coming up in what you're talking about or what you've mentioned, but my dad was saying how he saw the work of the teatro as propaganda.
Right.
That there was a message that you guys were trying to put out there and it was, you know, it was a good way of doing that and blah, blah, blah, blah.
Do you think that like that was what was like new and unique about it is that there was some kind of like accessible message to what you guys were doing or because I'm trying to think like what would be the difference?
Like most theater has some kind of message to it.
Like, why was this different?
Well, there's a little bit of a tangent.
You know that your cousin, Amelia, and Melinda are always doing theater.
They're in theater.
And I learned from Ron Davis.
Ron Davis was with the San Francisco Meme Troupe.
And he was actually Luis's mentor.
Yeah.
Okay.
And he once told me when they were just building the Center for Performing Arts there in San Jose, and they were starting to produce, you know, Music Man, Oklahoma, all of those stages, all of those kinds of plays.
He said, you know when a community is becoming middle class, when they start
delivering this type of theater because it is this type of theater that puts the masses to sleep they no longer are thinking about social justice and so what what you see in commercial theater what you see in commercial theater is people
Like just entertainment.
Just being entertained.
And then this other kind of theater is like maybe kind of a call to action or something.
Correct.
Okay.
And then, okay, so let's get back to, well, let me step one or take one step back because the other thing you mentioned was how being in the teatro was kind of like a different form of education.
You talked about
Like Luis would be doing some kind of research or get into some kind of topic and then he would share with you guys what he learned.
Right.
And so I think, I mean, I think that's something else to maybe add to the kind of collective that you guys had because it wasn't just a teatro, it was a community, right?
Yeah.
And then that takes us back to the Virgen de Guadalupe, right?
So prior to that little sidebar, we were talking about the Virgen, and you were saying how, you know, during the UFW march, that that was kind of a symbol that convinced you, yeah, the Farm Workers Union, right?
that that was an image that kind of convinced you like, this is the side that I'm supposed to be on.
Um, because it was something, not only does the beat hand look like you, but it's something that you were familiar with from your past through going to church or whatever else.
Right.
So I kind of, I think I wanted to know a little bit more about where
Like, was that kind of the only area?
Was your family, did your family have like the virgen in their houses?
Like what was the connection between the virgen and like your familiarity with it?
Do you know what I'm saying?
You know what?
It's, it, it wasn't personal to me.
I know that my grandmother was a Guadalupana.
Victoriana?
Yeah.
So they had church groups, social groups, and she happened to be part of the social group that was dedicated to the patron saint.
They were Catholic, right?
Yes.
And grandpa's parents were not Catholic, right?
They were originally Catholic, and then they became apostolic in the mid-30s.
Do you know why?
Do you know what?
No.
I don't know what happened there.
What way?
How?
So it's not that I, what do you call it?
It's not that I, I mean, you know, I'd go to mass and I would see a, you know, a statue of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
I knew my grandmother was a Guadalupe, and she had her little,
her little pin, that we would go to Jamaica's when I was little, you know, and it was the Hualegupana Society that put on the Jamaica.
So, you know, it, but it wasn't like, I'm, you know, I'm a, and it isn't until, it isn't until we start working on, on that play
And it's not so much Our Lady of Guadalupe, but rather the indigenous side of the story.
It's really that, you know, what we start learning about is Juan Diego.
We start learning about how
Where she appeared had been previously a site that had a pyramid on it, Tepeyac.
It was her speaking, Nahuatl, and her speaking in that Indian tongue.
What the symbolism was on her clothing.
You know, the color of her cape.
the images on her little pink dress, how she was standing on that moon, what that moon meant, all of those symbols and their indigenous, their Indian meaning.
And is that something, like that whole story, is that something that you learned by being in the teatro?
Yeah.
Okay.
So nothing like when you were in church, they didn't tell you about all that?
No, no, no.
Your parents didn't tell you anything about that?
So it was that being involved in the teatro that you learned about that stuff.
Interesting.
And that's all part of that.
Like I said, it's all that part of developing, if you will, an identity.
And grasping onto, if you will, oh, holy shit, you know, we're part of a history of indigenous people that have been here for millennia.
We've been, you know, we have a culture, we have a philosophy, we have a...
What was that like to be, so let's see, how old were you?
You were like in your early 20s, right?
Yeah.
And so prior to really kind of being involved in the teatro, your family was pretty straight-laced, it sounds like.
Like not very, I mean, I don't want to say, and correct me if I'm wrong, but
They don't seem very like community involved.
No, they're not.
So they kind of like keep to themselves, they keep to their own family, take care of each other.
But the broader community is like not right, not super important for them.
So what was that like to be kind of like raised in that kind of community that was very kind of like closed in?
and without a lot of information about who you are and where you guys come from to then being part of this other community that is now like giving you this information about like who your people are this broader community of people and and your connections and
And just giving you this, this newer kind of information, like what was that like to go from that?
I was a sponge.
I was like a student.
I was like learning.
So it was pretty exciting.
Exciting.
Um, what about, well, I don't want to put words in your mouth, but I mean, was there like a sense of empowerment, like.
Because the way you were kind of talking about your, your earlier life was like, all I see are like these white people in the media on the magazines and like, it was humbling.
It was humbling.
It wasn't, um, you know, I was, I was not the first, but the second year of production, I got to be the, I got to play the video and, um,
I remember coming off stage and, you know, people are like, oh, and I'm like, uh, like, don't look at me.
Yeah.
I'm very, what do you call it?
I'm humbled by, it's not me.
I'm, and I don't know if that's my, if that's just a, a, a character,
flaw that i have you know that i can't accept you know any kind of i don't think so but i remember feeling i'm rolling my eyes right now but i really felt like i was not supposed to take credit for them or something yeah i felt like it was pretty it was pretty spectacular pretty spiritual
But the whole, what do you call it?
The whole learning process, Ro?
The whole learning process was, like I said, you're like a sponge.
You're just taking all of this in.
You're learning about this stuff.
I mean, I wasn't going to, I remember Luis reading El Popol Vuh.
I was never going to read El Popol Vuh.
Okay, that's one of the few Mayan books that were not burned.
And it's, I don't know how thick it is, and I don't know what kind of Spanish.
I wasn't ever going to read that, but I was really grateful that they could teach us out of that book, you know, some of the terms and some of the, you know, some of the concepts, some of these Mayan concepts.
And then to have the opportunity to meet people.
I mean, I remember going to Mexico City on my own and staying with one of the danzantes.
His name was Andres Segura.
And meeting a Mayan philosophy teacher that taught at the University of Mexico.
who literally sat me down and taught me the mysteries, if you will, of the Aztec calendar and how the Aztec calendar and the number sequence are all related to our physical bodies.
And you walk away from there going, oh, holy shit, this whole cosmic thing is like real.
You're just like, were you doing drugs?
I wasn't doing drugs.
I was like, holy shit.
Yeah, so it was very exciting.
It was a very exciting thing.
But not empowering yet.
You know what?
It isn't until I'm in my 30s that I begin to realize a certain power that I have.
And in my 40s, I really started using it.
And by my 50s, I was like cruising.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Okay, so you would say that your connection or relationship with the Chicano movement was as a member of Teatro Campesino and being kind of a participant in that.
But what I'm hearing is that you're not necessarily a leader, but maybe somebody who is more kind of in the background.
A foot soldier.
A foot soldier, okay.
And I guess maybe this kind of goes back to this question that I have next about...
when did you see or understand the movement, the Chicano movement, as being a movement?
And I know you kind of talked about the UFW march, but was there any point in time maybe between that and then in the 1970s or close to mid-1970s where you felt like, oh, we got a movement going on here?
There's a Chicano movement.
Or was that like not really?
I remember there was a march in LA.
The Chicano moratorium?
Yeah.
I remember, what do you call it?
All I remember is that I got new tennis shoes.
It was the first time I ever bought Nikes.
And they were awesome.
I was able to walk the entire distance and it didn't bother me to walk.
Remember I had a bad back.
That was always fragile when it came to my back.
So this was a big deal.
And just like in San Francisco where there were millions, there was a million people on Geary Street.
I remember standing there and looking up Geary and it was like, it was wall to wall.
You know how we saw last night Game of Thrones and you saw those thousands of soldiers?
There were thousands.
And so in the Chicano moratorium, that march, what you saw were hundreds of thousands.
So you went to that as well?
When was that, 1971?
I don't even remember anymore.
So you were there in L.A.
Did you get beat up?
No.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
Let's see.
Is there anything else about... Excuse me.
Can I do interviews?
No, go away.
I'm recording.
Now you're going to be in my recording.
um okay so we couldn't talked about that chicago movement stuff and then the teatro campesino and then okay um
So the next thing I want to ask you is about this idea of mestizaje.
So you know that that's what I'm working on for my project.
And I kind of wanted to ask you if you were familiar with that, if you are familiar with that term, and what you maybe know about it or how you understand it.
Around the kitchen table, Robie, when we were kids, the Saturday mornings were really special because it was the first time that we got to sit down with my mom and dad.
My dad was always either dinner time, just got off the table.
He was, you know, he had worked all day.
Saturdays gave us the opportunity to be with my dad
And it's like we were little kids, like stars, stargazing.
We were, you know, we just admired my dad and we always, you know, hung to every word, or I did anyway.
I don't know about my other siblings.
So the conversation would always, you know, what happened in school, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And invariably,
We would always get to this place where my dad would say to us, don't forget that you are mestizo.
You are part European, you're part Indian.
And that we come from a long line of Aztec.
I guess he said Aztec because my grandfather was from Toluca.
which is right by Mexico City.
But he would tell us to always be proud that we could never take that away and that we should never be ashamed of being brown and to have a lot of, what do you call it, and to have a lot of pride in who we were.
not to feel sorry for ourselves that we were brown.
I mean, that would be his message.
And we would, you know, kind of like, you know, we were, you know, we would get off the table and we'd feel good about ourselves.
We were, you know, we were proud.
So being mestizo was not, was not a,
was not a, what's the word I want?
A mystery to me.
Not like bicultural.
Nobody ever talked about being bicultural.
But mestizo they did.
My dad was very, what do you call it?
And it was my dad.
It was not my mom.
It was my dad that would tell us, you know, that we were mestizo.
So when I started hearing the term mestizo,
It was not an unfamiliar term.
I knew what that meant to be mestizo.
And so I saw that playing out with different plays that we were doing, with different, you know, the symbols
like we say that the Virgen de Guadalupe is synonymous with the farm workers movement, right?
And that symbol, it was a symbol of being indigenous and being European.
But it was, what do you call it?
It was something that you identified with.
So you see it incorporated, you know, in the... And I think because Luis saw that, Roby, you know, he was with the farm workers and, you know, that early work that they did with the octos.
I mean, he saw how the virgen played a role with the farm workers.
He wasn't stupid, so he knew that he could incorporate those kinds of
those kinds of symbols that would then trigger, if you will, a nonverbal response, an emotional response.
And so when we start doing more deliberate cultural kinds of productions,
They are intended.
They were deliberate.
They were deliberate pulls of who we are as a people.
Can I ask you, because you brought up the Vidhin again, and you were talking about how the Vidhin is a symbol of
indigenous and European or that mestizo symbol, right?
How do you see or how do you understand those two, the indigenous and European aspects of the Viten?
I think, I mean, we kind of talked about the indigenous connections.
Right, right, right, right.
So what do you see as being, what do you see as that image or that symbol's connection to Europe?
She's there as a symbol to identify the oppression that's going on.
And she's saying her message to Juan Diego, go tell the archbishop, go tell the obispo to build a temple here.
Not on Fifth Street, here on Tepeyac.
which meant, which meant put it, put it right here where, where my indigenous people have always come to honor their goddesses.
Okay.
So in some ways she is she's this manifestation with power
over the European, because, I mean, clearly the Catholic Church is coming from Europe.
The oppression is coming from Europe.
And so it is almost, she's almost symbolizing a victory over the oppressor in some ways.
So if
Okay, I just want to clarify because I think I might be a little confused.
So first off, you talked about grandpa mentioning that you guys are Mestizo, you're indigenous and European, right?
And then when you're talking about the Virgen de Guadalupe as being this Mestizo image, it sounds like you're talking about that in a different way of this
this clash between indigenous and European, that it's not that she is those things at the same time, but that she's indigenous and she is in some way speaking to the power of the European, whether it's oppression, whether it's spiritual domination, whatever.
So do you see like,
where there's a little bit of like, I'm not seeing like, I don't know, or maybe you can just kind of like clarify what you mean by that, because on the one hand, when you're telling the story about grandpa, I hear you saying, here's these two things, but they're one, and that's what we are, Ms.
Cecil, right?
And then in this story of the Vidhin, I hear, here is the Vidhin who is
Indigenous being kind of like the only power against that other thing, the European values or whatever.
So I think what you're seeing is it's not like my father interpreted Our Lady of Guadalupe as a political entity.
I, through my own evolution,
have come to see her that way.
Yeah.
So it's not like, all I'm saying is that being mestizo was not an unfamiliar term.
Seeing her in the context of the virgen, I see her in a political, you know, in a political frame.
Okay.
Not that... I think my dad was probably how you would define... He was apolitical in this particular... He was just being matter of fact.
You know, we've got these... No, he was being political.
He was telling us to be proud of being brown.
He was saying, we have a history.
So now I have this experience of a production called Virgen de Tepeyac.
I see it in political terms, but I also see, and I see it probably in the same way, you know, which is the pride of
of this icon being brown and speaking Nahuatl.
So I don't see them as too incongruent.
I think my
My confusion, though, is like in the story and grandpa's story, there is this real kind of like clear sense of identity.
Right.
We are.
Yes.
European and indigenous.
And I'm not seeing that in terms of the virgen, because you're basically saying the virgen is indigenous.
and addressing European concerns or European things.
Right.
European power structures.
So that's what I'm seeing as like, is she mestizo or is she indigenous?
She's indigenous.
Okay.
Well, let's take...
She's the... Hold on, I'm going to grab another water.
You want it?
Yeah.
She's the... What's the word I want?
Manifestation?
The manifestation... Of... The Blessed Mary.
Right?
The Mother of God.
Yes, the Mother of Jesus.
Yeah, not God.
Oh, sorry.
Jesus.
I'm not a Catholic.
I don't know.
Good.
So in that sense, but, but, she's, she's Indian.
She's Indian.
Well, so here's my kind of theory on that because I think I showed you like my chapters for my dissertation.
And I'm going to put one in there on the Vidhin, right?
Because I think it is a really kind of like important part of this mestizo, mestizaje story, right?
And that's that you have this
Whatever she is, right?
Whether she's an apparition, whether she's a goddess, like whatever she is, she's indigenous, right?
And she's been indigenous until the Catholic Church comes along and says, oh, we can use this to help convert those indigenous, right?
And it's at that point that she becomes mestizo.
not when she first appears to Juan Diego, not when she does all the things that she's, you know, build my temple here, that, you know, that this, this image, this, whatever happened that when, when Juan Diego went up to Tepeyac, that, that event was used to manipulate and convert.
And that,
Later, it wasn't that moment that she came, but that later on she was made mestizo for these other political purposes.
That's my kind of take on it.
I think the Catholic Church would want
would want to claim in some way or another that she's Miss Diesel.
Yeah.
She's not.
She's Indian.
Right.
She's Indian through and through.
How is it possible that the mother of God or the mother of Jesus can be Indian?
She can be anything she wants.
But you're right.
She gets used to, what do you call it?
To convert.
Yeah.
Okay, so this is really interesting.
If we can go back to that topic of mestizaje, mestizo.
So you said that early in your life, which I think is like really, really interesting because
Prior to this question or this particular topic, you know, we're talking about how your family is very kind of like... Conservative.
Conservative, right?
And then here comes Grandpa telling his little brown babies to be proud because you're Mestizo, you have a history.
Like, I think that's... I don't even know how to explain that, but okay.
So, but as a child, you are...
familiar with this term because of your parents, right?
Your dad.
And so you've always been somewhat aware that what was meant by that was indigenous and European.
And then there was some kind of pride in that.
There was pride in being Indian.
Oh, sorry.
Okay.
Pride in being Indian.
Not Ms.
Diesel.
Pride in, well, because we're mestizal, okay?
Pride in being brown.
So not just being proud of the European side, but this other part too.
Right, right.
I see.
And not even winning, not even paying attention to the European side of things.
Who cares what that white stuff is?
We're more interested in being Indian.
That's the way.
it came across to us and then so so that's interesting and then what was so you mentioned that when you went to san jose state you came into contact with that biculturalism bilingualism right um
And was this idea or notion of mestizaje or mestizo, was that also kind of floating around during that time period that you remember?
I don't remember.
You don't remember.
Okay.
I don't remember.
Wait a minute.
I don't think.
I want to say that that concept... I don't think I'm picking you up here.
Talk again.
I don't think that concept is bantered around until we get to the Chicano moratorium.
Okay.
So within the context of San Jose State, I don't remember.
Certainly not as part of
Vietnam.
But by the time we get to Chicano moratorium... What are you doing?
We're doing an interview so you could tell me to stop so you can make your sandwich.
So we're talking about mestizaje.
Mestizo and when you like heard it again as an adult and you were saying that you didn't hear anything about it when you were at state but like some point after like the Chicano moratorium so like in the early kind of mid 70s like
And so can you tell me a little bit, if you remember, like what you remember about it in that time period, where you're hearing it from, what you are hearing about it?
I'm trying to think of, are there,
Are there, you know, there's a lot of different theatrical companies that have sprung up all throughout the Southwest.
A lot of those directors, you know, very thoughtful, mindful kinds of individuals, creative,
And so you hear, trying to think of, you know, some of them are college professors, some of them are students, some of them are... Can you think of any of their names?
I wouldn't be...
You'd have to give me a while to think of their names.
But okay, so you're talking about these other kind of theatrical groups that are springing up.
Yeah, and you're starting to see writers, you're starting to see college professors, you're starting to see
student leaders, and articulate.
And you start hearing those kinds of terms.
And again, here, it has to do with identifying.
Up until now, remember I told you that in the US, up until the 50s and early 60s, we really don't have an identity.
Or if we have an identity, it's an identity that's been created by someone other than us.
And now you hear Chicano poets, Chicano writers, Chicano filmmakers, Chicano directors, Chicano student leaders, students who are beginning to voice themselves.
And that's where you see, you know, you hear the term.
I don't know how, I don't know how, certainly it runs the gamut.
You know, I think of, you know, I think of someone like Breeze who
Studied, like I said, you know, reading the , it's a studying with Mexican philosophy teachers who has, who is grasping, if you will, and interpreting for a Chicano movement, what it is to be indigenous.
You know what that,
Some of the terms that, that he pulled out of Pupupu were really, I thought were.
Were really spectacular.
Can you remember any?
There was a term for artist.
It was the Mexican, I think is the indigenous word.
The Spanish translation is .
And the English interpretation is, or that was the word that they used for artisan.
So what did that mean?
That meant that the person that was creating was creating through a life, through a state of creation, which is the state of a God, that God is who, who creates things.
And so for an artist,
To be, to have that kind of creativity meant that he had an affinity with some God or deity.
It's not even that.
I don't think that's what it means.
It means... Not like a God is speaking through you or something like that.
No, it's that, is that you...
Corazon endiosado, your heart has been enveloped by... Like possessed.
By a spirit, by the spirit of creativity.
But like possession or something like that?
Not possessed.
Not like we use possessed today.
But...
Like it's whatever the spirit is, has taken over that person and enables them to be created.
That's what I said earlier in your head now.
Um, so, but watch what it means.
Yes.
It's the fusing of the spirit and the body.
with the body.
There was another term, you've seen it, ing lakesh.
You are my other self.
That duality.
And that duality has to do with the whole concept of the Quetzalcoatl, the plumed serpent.
Two opposites.
Where is that opposite?
plumes are on birds yeah serpents i'm asking you i'm not like being facetious serpents crawl on the earth so that what you have now are two different entities fused together but it really is more about the symbol the sim symbolic
nature of how the Maya saw the world, that philosophy that, that there's always two, everything is in, you want everything in balance.
It's like you have a right and a left and up and a down, a forward and a back.
And that your life is supposed to be in balance.
Even, you know what I do, Robbie?
I literally, if I'm going to exercise on this side, I got to exercise on this side.
If I put lotion on this side, I got to put lotion on.
I've deemed my right side of my body as earth, and I deem my left side as spirit.
So whenever anything is bothering me on my left side, I'm like, what's wrong with my spiritual side of the world?
yeah okay you're talking about your left and right side one being spirit earth we're talking about about indigenous beliefs yeah no i'm just trying to get us back to what we were just talking about because keep getting interrupted
That's all I had to say about it.
So what does that have to do?
Okay, testing.
Go ahead.
Say something.
Can you hear me?
Nope.
Not yet?
How about over here?
Put it over here.
Then you can't hear me.
Let's see.
Can you hear me now?
Yes.
Can we hear each other?
Okay, so we're talking about mesizaje.
We are talking about your familiarity with the concept from when you first learned about it as a child from grandpa.
And then when you started to hear it again as an adult.
And you're talking about that it comes back up again around the Chicano moratorium time period.
That you're seeing different teatros kind of spring up over the Southwest.
And that people who are in positions of leadership are maybe more... Influenced.
or that they're more like educated or something like that.
And that this term is popping up again.
Right.
And then, um, you're talking about, uh, you know what?
I don't, because you had, you got, went on this tangent about,
uh different things that were learned from like ancient indigenous or like indigenous kinds of philosophies and you were talking about the dualism and stuff like that right um so i think like if you could maybe kind of bring that back to the messy topic like why did you when we when we started talking about this why did you then kind of go into the
indigenous philosophy part of it.
You know what, because I'm going to go back to the term mestizo, mestizake.
It always, it was an acknowledgement that, that we were not pure Indian, that we had been
a conquered people, you know, the Europeans had come, but the European blood was not as, as, as strong as the Indian blood, the Indian.
And so Mestizahya always, even though it was acknowledging
it was acknowledging both European and indigenous blood.
It was really a call to pride in being Indian and having that Indian blood, even if we didn't know that much about it, that we had that pride in being Indian.
And I don't know whether or not, you know, I don't even know,
That my grandparents... Which grandparents?
Both grandparents.
So my mom's mother, she looked more European as opposed to my grandfather.
My grandfather would have told you how proud he was to have been Wichol Indian.
My grandmother wouldn't want to talk about it.
She looked more European.
So I think a lot of it had to do with, because clearly, clearly you see, you see the racism, you see the color.
Even in Mexico, you see the color, you see, what do you call it?
Fair-skinned people.
And somewhere or another, they're elevated.
Mm-hmm.
As opposed to darker skin, dark haired Indian people.
So my, and then on my dad's side, again, my grandmother was more indigenous looking than my grandfather.
My grandfather was more European yet looking.
My father, my own father and mother are both dark, dark hair, dark skin.
And so maybe it was their way of claiming I'm just as good.
I don't know.
But clearly, to me, the way it came across, and maybe it was because I'm dark skinned, was to feel pride in having indigenous blood.
Mm-hmm.
And when you said that you made a reference about Indian blood being stronger, what do you mean when you say Indian blood?
Tribal blood, Indian blood, Azteca, Maya.
But what do you mean when you say blood?
Like, do you mean, like, the genetics?
Or do you mean the culture, the values, the knowledge?
Or are you strictly meaning, like, the genetics?
The biological?
The...
Probably both, Roby.
So like all of that?
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
And then, so part of what you were talking about too was this idea of like Chicano identity, right?
You mentioned like, oh, after the Chicano moratorium, you start seeing Chicano theater, Chicano this, Chicano that, Chicano blah, blah, blah, blah, right?
Um, how did you understand what that meant?
What did, what does Chicano mean?
Um, I thought that.
Like, what was that identity?
It was, what do you call it?
I don't remember exactly.
I remember Louise defining Chicano, that it came from an indigenous word.
Hmm.
so it was a what do you call it it was kind of a hyphenated kind of from some kind of some kind of indigenous word and i don't know what it where it came from i just remember the concept that it was that that it was a claim to it was a claim to our indian heritage and it was a claim it and it was and it was an ancient word
But I couldn't tell you more than that.
Do you have any idea where that came from?
Aside from like you heard somebody like Luis talk about it and that's how you became familiar with it.
I'm talking about that Mestizo, Mestizaje stuff, not necessarily the Chicano stuff.
Do you know where they picked that up from or where you think they picked it up from or was it just like, oh, one day they showed up?
I thought it was just common knowledge.
Common knowledge?
among Mexicans.
I mean, that was our, that was our heritage.
We had been a hundred percent indigenous and then we're invaded and we're, what do you call it?
So you're kind of tying it to the history or like at least knowledge of, okay, this used to be an indigenous land.
Right.
Spanish people, white people came in.
and conquered it, and so there must be... Rape us.
Rape us.
The logical conclusion would be that there is now this kind of new mix of people.
Yeah, I'm trying to think of the word mestiza.
Mestiza.
Mm-hmm.
And where the word comes from.
Mezcla is a mix.
Mix.
Is Mestiza a Spanish word that gets created in the new world?
So that, you know, it just comes through generation after generation.
Mestiza.
Mestizos.
Like Creoles, Cajuns.
Okay.
Trying to think if there's anything else about the Misty Saha stuff.
So you're not super familiar with where, aside from just assuming or thinking that
It's a concept or it's an idea that everybody knows about.
Do you think, like, if it's something that everybody knows about, why is it kind of being picked up or, like, does it seem to come back into play during the Chicano movement or Chicano more?
Well, I mean, clearly, Robie, American culture,
American culture isn't, and certainly I remember terms like assimilation, acculturation, those kinds of terms, you know, again, here, those are terms that you're hearing in academia.
You're hearing those terms that have been created by white scholars.
There's no recognition in any of that kind of research or that kind of work that's been done to address Mexican-Americans.
Maybe African-American, I'm not familiar.
Certainly, what do you call it?
By the 50s, by the 50s and early, by the 50s,
Um, uh, American Indians, Native Americans are thought to have been eradicated.
We don't have an Indian problem anymore.
We got them off the reservation.
We're getting them out of here.
They're not, and there's no articulation, you know, for Mexicans, even though we've been here for, I don't know how many hundreds of years.
Certainly in California and the Southwest, we've been here, but in mainstream or in my world, in my little Kern County world, I'm not seeing, I'm not seeing in photo play or 17 or any of those little magazines, anything about Latinas, anything about brown skin,
that what you see in magazines today is not what I was seeing when I was a kid.
It was all white, all blonde, all blue eyed.
So there was never any, so, so it's not surprising that you didn't hear, you know, terms about, about being indigenous and having pride in
Are you kidding?
They've just wiped out all the Indians.
They think they've gotten rid of the Indian problem.
We can just dust that under the rug.
You know, the original sin of this country.
What?
We're going to talk about Mexicans and their Indian heritage?
Oh, no, no, no.
We're not having any of that.
So you don't ever see that.
So you see...
Chicanos taking on as a badge of pride, you know, being, being mestizo, being, because up until then, you're trying to push me, you know, this whole conversation about the census.
I mean, we were identified as white.
There was no box for Mexican.
There was no Hispanic box.
There was no, you know, I'm either black or white.
I wasn't black.
So, so to, to identify, to, to, to grab hold of, of this piece of your, of your heritage,
is where that comes from, that identity.
But are you referring to the Chicano identity or the Mestizo identity?
Chicano and Mestizo are synonymous.
To whom?
To those people who were assuming the Chicano identity?
So you would say that most everybody who is using that Chicano term
was identified as mestizo or identified, saw themselves as mestizo.
Mestizos.
And then where did Latino come from?
I don't know.
I missed something.
I was too busy having kids.
I didn't see it coming.
I don't know where it came.
And Hispanic?
All of a sudden we're Hispanic.
What?
Actually, I was reading an article.
Some guy was saying that when the Chicano movement was happening and people were starting to identify as Chicano, that other Latin American communities were like, we're not Chicano, we're Latinos.
And then it was kind of that there was a real kind of like
measure to distance themselves.
And then who knows, I mean, maybe there was some like Mexican Americans that also were, you know, like Lulax and the American GI forum type groups, you know, that were like, no, we're not Chicanos.
Yeah.
Chicano probably, probably if, if I walked in a room and I said, I'm Chicana, there is a certain political undertone to that.
So the Mexican-American.
Oh, no, I'm Mexican-American.
That's more your assimilated.
Me, I was being a little radical and calling myself Chicana.
Yeah.
And then someplace along the line, somebody took that away from me.
Called you Latino?
No, called me Hispanic.
That came first.
I always used it.
I always, it graded on me.
I didn't like the term Hispanic.
It's too European for me.
So I didn't mind adopting Latina.
That was better than Hispanic.
Hispanic was like, you're trying to be European again.
I didn't like that.
Let's see, what was I going to ask?
Okay, um, I think that's all I, I think that's all I really have.
Unless you want to, like, add anything else, like your own kind of concluding remarks.
Because really for me, like, what I'm interested in is trying to understand, like,
where this term of mestizo, mestizaje, like how it was understood by people who were involved in the Chicano movement, where they came up with it, how they understood it, how they were familiar with it, how they, what I already said, how they understood it, right?
Mm-hmm.
Like how did they see, if it was even something that was a big deal, right?
And like where that kind of came from.
Like what are the connections?
Because whatever term you want to use, like that's not a United States thing.
Like it is, it has a long history in Latin America.
But
From what I know about it is that it doesn't become a kind of like topic in the U.S.
or like, you know, in documented history until around the Chicana movement.
And so I'm curious, like, how did that happen?
How did it get up here?
How did it get adopted?
How was it?
Was it an intellectual thing?
Was it a cultural thing?
Part of what I found really interesting about our talk is that you're talking about hearing it first from your dad, from grandpa, who's uneducated, who's poor, but this is some kind of idea that he is aware of.
Where he got that from, I don't know.
Right?
Like, where is this coming down from?
So I find that interesting.
The other thing, like, when I was talking to dad about this, particularly, like, as... Because dad, like, when I asked dad about it, he said, we never thought of ourselves as mestizo.
We thought of ourselves, we identified as Tejanos and Mexicans.
Tejanos and Mexicans.
and that it wasn't until like maybe later when he was like part of you know the movement when he was when he went into college and then became more involved in the movement that this term kind of sprung out right or that he became familiar with it and that he recalls it being um
like something that was talked about or or like this concept that was talked about from um corky gonzalez do you know corky gonzalez and his poem yo soy walking right and um so anyway so i think it's it's interesting to hear those kind of different different backgrounds on it
So I think that's really it for me.
I don't know if there's anything you want to add.
Do you want to add anything else?
The only thing that I would add, Robi, is that especially in your line of work, I think that
what was lost in colonization.
And probably this goes to not just Mexico and it goes to all the indigenous people of this continent.
But there was, there was
a people.
There was a way in which they saw and interpreted the world.
There's a way in which they raised their children.
There was a way in which they defined roles and responsibilities.
That was all disrupted.
I think there are elements
There are elements that have remained.
I believe that there is such a thing as genetic memory.
I'm only laughing because my dad said the same thing.
Yeah.
And I think that there's, what do you call it?
So I think that there's a way in which we
inherent, we just look at the world in a certain kind of way and interpret the universe in a certain kind of way.
I would hope that your generation will come closer to helping us regain
some of that memory.
Actually, this reminds me of something else my dad was talking about, or that came up in our conversation, which was the Reconquista, right?
But the way that my dad and I were talking about it was because he actually, he didn't bring up, you know what the term is, Reconquista, no?
The Reconquista, okay, so originally it was, it's used to describe the Spanish reclamation of the Iberian Peninsula from the Moors, right?
And they call that the Reconquista and then in the U.S.
the idea of the Reconquista is that Mexican Americans or Latinos
are going to reclaim the, you know, like the Southwest, because that was part of our, our territory.
Um, and so like, but what my dad and I were talking about was a reclamation of, um, we talked about land, culture, spirituality, ways of life and knowing.
And so I was wondering if that's kind of like what you mean in terms of like this next generation or future generations that we get closer to reclaiming those things, right?
Like this whole kind of like different lifestyle or making that kind of come back.
Is that what you're talking about?
Well, this is the little that I know, Ro, the little that I know is that
The Inca were performing brain surgery before the Europeans even came to the Americas.
The pyramids were built with musical tones.
The astronomers that built the pyramids tracked the stars.
That's telling you that there is an incredible wisdom in the Americas.
And if they had that incredible wisdom, did they have a lifestyle that was fair and just?
I don't know.
That, I don't know.
I just know the accomplishments.
I know that, what do you call it?
That we look at
Europe and we look at their castles and we look at their Notre Dames and their cathedrals and we go and their paintings and we go, you know, we look at them in awe.
What is it about the Americas that we don't look at it in awe?
Are rocks too, I don't know.
Too brown.
Too brown, too rough, too... But yet what they accomplished was incredible.
I don't know that... I'm not saying we're going to reclaim our land.
I just want us to get to a world view.
I think we have something to contribute to the world.
That I want to see.
I saw an inkling of it in my lifetime.
I saw, I can't remember who it was.
It was a politician, Latino politician in Santa Clara County.
He won the election.
He brought his father.
It was the first time that you, you know, white people, it's all about them, right?
This man was bringing his father on stage with him, telling the world that family is more important than anything, that you are not an individual, but that you're part of a construct.
And I thought, you know, those are the kinds of things that people need to learn.
And those are the kinds of things, those kinds of contributions are the kinds of contributions that I'm hoping that your work, your body of work will bring about.
There must be something incredibly profound about who we are as a people.
That's all I'm saying.
And I'm not saying that's
about land, about reclaiming.
But I mean, that's not the only thing.
You know, we're talking about culture, spirituality, ways of life.
Knowing.
Knowledge.
So, I mean, and the land is connected to all of that too.
So, I mean, it is an important component, but it's not the only component.
Well, you know what?
I see that for American Indians.
Like, I see babes
Once they don't have their land, they cease to be a people.
They must hold on to land.
That's kind of like what happened to our indigenous people.
I mean, not that there aren't any indigenous people that exist, right?
But that... I think part of the problem with the Mesisaje stuff is that
It is, it's the establishment of like this new people that really are not, they're not, they're not new.
They've been here.
They're indigenous people.
Right.
But it is like, what's kind of pernicious about it is that the label, the idea behind it is to dispossess people of
land to dispossess people of knowledge to dispossess people of their history and that you know that that has been like there's a point you were just talking about right in your childhood where you're not seeing in in the rest of the world appreciation for for your people right
You're not seeing in the outer world recognition or appreciation even by your own people of your people, right?
And that it's not until kind of like the Chicano movement that this starts to get a little bit flipped, right?
That people are starting to really kind of like,
I don't want to say wake up, but, like, become aware of their history, become aware of, on a more, like, on a mass movement, right?
Not just you in your kitchen with your dad.
Right, right.
But that there's more people who are getting this message.
I don't know where I was going with that, but whatever.
So, anyways, okay.
I think that's it.
Anything else?
No.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.